Refactor the probabilistic sampler processor; add FailClosed configuration, prepare for OTEP 235 support (#31946)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib: processor/probabilisticsamplerprocessor/README.md

<!-- end autogenerated section -->

The probabilistic sampler processor supports several modes of sampling
for spans and log records.  Sampling is performed on a per-request
basis, considering individual items statelessly.  For whole trace
sampling, see
[tailsamplingprocessor](../tailsamplingprocessor/README.md).

For trace spans, this sampler supports probabilistic sampling based on
a configured sampling percentage applied to the TraceID.  In addition,
the sampler recognizes a `sampling.priority` annotation, which can
force the sampler to apply 0% or 100% sampling.

For log records, this sampler can be configured to use the embedded
TraceID and follow the same logic as applied to spans.  When the
TraceID is not defined, the sampler can be configured to apply hashing
to a selected log record attribute.  This sampler also supports
sampling priority.

## Consistency guarantee

A consistent probability sampler is a Sampler that supports
independent sampling decisions for each span or log record in a group
(e.g. by TraceID), maintaining that traces will be complete with a

> certain minimum probability.

Author: I've revised this paragraph and the next to try and be clear/concise about consistency and completeness, without turning it into a book-length article. 

When the next PR in this sequence is up for consideration, this can be improved further. When the OTEP-235 sampling methods are added, in other words, I'll have to add more statements about how to preserve completeness when both the SDK and Collector are using a consistent approach.

Consistent probability sampling requires that for any span in a given
trace, if a Sampler with lesser sampling probability selects the span
for sampling, then the span would also be selected by a Sampler

> configured with greater sampling probability.

Author: See revised text. https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/31946/commits/594852f504bd5783116fe9b66d9690e6a4d17940

> configured with greater sampling probability.

Reviewer: Alright -- I think we might want to make it easier to digest in the future, but let's wait for users to provide feedback.

## Sampling randomness

To achieve consistency, sampling randomness is taken from a
deterministic aspsect of the input data.  For traces pipelines, the
source of randomness is always the TraceID.  For logs pipelines, the
source of randomness can be the TraceID or another log record
attribute, if configured.

For log records, the `attribute_source` and `from_attribute` fields determine the
source of randomness used for log records.  When `attribute_source` is
set to `traceID`, the TraceID will be used.  When `attribute_source`
is set to `record` or the TraceID field is absent, the value of
`from_attribute` is taken as the source of randomness (if configured).

## Sampling priority

> The `sampling.priority` semantic convention takes precedence over the

Author: I'm removing the "semantic convention" from the sentence. We don't have a semantic convention, and when I discovered the inconsistency documented here, I decided we probably don't need one. I'm just trying to preserver what's here, which doesn't make a lot of sense.

probabilistic decision in all modes.

🛑 Compatibility note: Logs and Traces have different behavior.

In traces pipelines, when the priority attribute has value 0, the
configured probability will by modified to 0% and the item will not
pass the sampler.  When the priority attribute is non-zero the

> configured probability will modified to 100%.  The sampling priority

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
configured probability will be set to 100%.  The sampling priority
```

> attribute is fixed, `sampling.priority`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
attribute is not configurable, and is called `sampling.priority`.
```

In logs pipelines, when the priority attribute has value 0, the
configured probability will by modified to 0%, and the item will not
pass the sampler.  Otherwise, the sampling priority attribute is
interpreted as a percentage, with values >= 100 equal to 100%
sampling.  The sampling priority is configurable, via

> `from_attribute`.

Reviewer 2: According to this, sampling priority comes from `from_attribute`, but according to the above, randomness *also* comes from `from_attribute`?

Author: Thanks -- fixed 9c1d6e22d7

> interpreted as a percentage, with values >= 100 equal to 100%

Author: I was very surprised by this. I have preserved the inconsistency and I am not sure what we should do about it.

> interpreted as a percentage, with values >= 100 equal to 100%

Reviewer: I think this might be the perfect opportunity for this change, but not necessarily part of this PR.

## Sampling algorithm

### Hash seed

The hash seed method uses the FNV hash function applied to either a
Trace ID (spans, log records), or to the value of a specified
attribute (only logs).  The hashed value, presumed to be random, is
compared against a threshold value that corresponds with the sampling
percentage.

This mode requires configuring the `hash_seed` field.  This mode is
enabled when the `hash_seed` field is not zero, or when log records
are sampled with `attribute_source` is set to `record`.

> In order for hashing to work, all collectors for a given tier

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order for hashing to be consistent, all collectors for a given tier
```

(e.g. behind the same load balancer) must have the same
`hash_seed`. It is also possible to leverage a different `hash_seed`
at different collector tiers to support additional sampling
requirements.

This mode uses 14 bits of sampling precision.

### Error handling

This processor considers it an error when the arriving data has no
randomess.  This includes conditions where the TraceID field is
invalid (16 zero bytes) and where the log record attribute source has
zero bytes of information.

By default, when there are errors determining sampling-related
information from an item of telemetry, the data will be refused.  This
behavior can be changed by setting the `fail_closed` property to

> false, in which case erroneous data will pass through the processor.

Author: Yes. the single metric event corresponding with each span/log record decision encodes the form of randomness that was input. When there is no input randomness, this will show as the policy name.

## Configuration

The following configuration options can be modified:

> - `sampling_percentage` (required): Percentage at which items are sampled; >= 100 samples all items, 0 rejects all items.

Reviewer 2: can we specify the type of all of these, please?

Author: f5a57a1859

> - `hash_seed` (no default, optional): An integer used to compute the hash algorithm. Note that all collectors for a given tier (e.g. behind the same load balancer) should have the same hash_seed.

Reviewer 2: Maybe "default=0", rather than "no default"?

Author: Agree, thanks. f5a57a1859

> - `fail_closed` (default = false, optional): Whether to reject items with sampling-related errors.

Reviewer 2: you say above that default is true. Please reconcile which is the default behavior and adjust the wording in one place or the other.

Author: Fixed. 8fbf133450

> - `fail_closed` (boolean, optional, default = true): Whether to reject items with sampling-related errors.

Author: The current implementation has an odd inconsistency which this is meant to resolve in a user-configurable way. In cases where there is no randomness, the sampling decision is fixed and therefore depends on the configured probability. For some probabilities, the failure would be open, and for other probabilities, the failure would be closed--depending on the hash seed.

I added this test to demonstrate:

```
func TestEmptyHashFunction(t *testing.T) {
	// With zero bytes of randomness, seed=0:
	hashed32 := computeHash([]byte{}, 0)
	hashed := uint64(hashed32 & bitMaskHashBuckets)
	require.Equal(t, uint64(0x3515), hashed)
	require.InDelta(t, 0.829, float64(hashed)/float64(numHashBuckets), 0.001)

	// With 16 bytes of 0s, seed=0:
	var b [16]byte
	hashed32 = computeHash(b[:], 0)
	hashed = uint64(hashed32 & bitMaskHashBuckets)
	require.Equal(t, uint64(0x2455), hashed)
	require.InDelta(t, 0.568, float64(hashed)/float64(numHashBuckets), 0.001)
}
```

So for empty TraceIDs (16 bytes of 0s) are sampled at 56.8% and above, and logs with missing attribute values (0 bytes) are sampled at 82.9% and above. Since I expect most users are configuring probabilities at 50% or below, most users would never see these items of telemetry and never knew there was a problem. I think reversing the decision w/ FailClosed=false by default, so that users receive these spans, is a better outcome.

> - `fail_closed` (boolean, optional, default = true): Whether to reject items with sampling-related errors.

Reviewer: Sounds good!
